
.. _whatisnifti:

******************
**What is NIfTI?**
******************

.. contents:: :local:


Overview
========

NIfTI stands for the **Neuroimaging Informatics Technology
Initiative**. The acronym is also essentially synonymous with the
neuroimaging data format that the Initiative created. This was first
released in 2004:

* | Cox RW, Ashburner J, Breman H, Fissell K, Haselgrove C, Holmes CJ,
    Lancaster JL, Rex DE, Smith SM, Woodward JB, Strother SC (2004). **A
    (sort of) new image data format standard: NiFTI-1.** Presented at
    the 10th Annual Meeting of the Organization for Human Brain
    Mapping.
  | :download:`The OHBM-2004 poster <media/hbm_nifti_2004.pdf>`

The primary goal of NIfTI is to provide coordinated and targeted
service, training, and research to speed the development and enhance
the utility of informatics tools related to neuroimaging. The National
Institute of Mental Health and the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke are joint sponsors of this initiative.


Background
======================

A variety of neuroimaging technologies allow the structure and
function of the intact human brain to be studied with minimal
invasion, presenting a tremendous opportunity to better understand the
human brain, both in healthy and disordered states. Neuroimaging
provides a crucial perspective for basic and clinical human
neuroscience.

Informatics tools are key at all stages of neuroimaging, allowing
scientists to control highly sophisticated imaging instruments and to
make sense of the vast amounts of complex data generated by them. For
example, in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), informatics
is used to: design and implement the manner in which the imaging
instruments capture signals from the brain, guide the behavioral tasks
used to probe particular brain systems, reconstruct the resulting
signals into a three-dimensional representation of the brain, correct
for and suppress noise, statistically analyze the data, and visualize
the results. This list is not comprehensive, and, of course,
informatics is also used in storing, querying, retrieving, sharing and
comparing data once they are collected.

While informatics tools are paramount to taking full advantage of the
promise of neuroimaging, seizing this opportunity is, paradoxically,
impeded by the informatics tools currently used by the neuroimaging
research community. In the use of functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), for example, many existing tools have been developed
piecemeal, by scientists who are interested in answering particular
neuroscience questions rather than in producing software products that
are optimized for meeting the many and varied needs of the broader
research community. It is, therefore, not surprising that many of
these informatics tools are not as robust, generally useful, or easy
to use as they might be. And, while a handful of neuroimaging
informatics tools are suitable for general use, many important tools
are not widely available. Furthermore, even those that are in general
use make varying assumptions, use different algorithms, or implement
similar algorithms in different ways.

This Tower of Babel problem raises important concerns about
compatibility between different tools; it also limits the ability of
scientists to rigorously compare their findings, which is the
foundation upon which progress in science is built.

Over the course of the past several years, through a variety of large
and small venues, sponsored and initiated by the National Institutes
of Health and others, members of the neuroimaging research community
have made clear the need for informatics tools that are reliable,
accurate, easy to use, and clearly documented. Members of that
research community have also repeatedly expressed interest in being
able to rigorously compare different tools and algorithms and
improving compatibility and interoperability across tools and
data. This community also wants training opportunities in neuroimaging
informatics that are not currently available. Clearly, there is a need
for leadership and resources to advance neuroimaging informatics tools
used by researchers.


The initiative
======================================================

The Neuroimaging Informatics Technology Initiative (NIfTI) is meant to
work with the tool-user and tool-developer communities to address
these needs. Thus, the primary goal of NIfTI is to provide coordinated
and targeted service, training, and research to speed the development
and enhance the utility of informatics tools related to
neuroimaging. The National Institute of Mental Health and the National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke are joint sponsors of
this initiative.

The initial focus of NIfTI will be on tools that are used in
fMRI. There are several reasons to focus on this area. First, a
circumscribed substantive area like fMRI offers a constrained test bed
for NIfTI, which represents a novel approach to addressing a
community-wide problem. Second, fMRI is rapidly growing, and
improvement in informatics tools will likely have broad benefits for
neuroscience. Third, there are a small number of widely used
informatics tools used by many in the fMRI research community, so
there are greater tool-related commonalities in this area compared to
other neuroimaging modalities, thusly increasing the cost/benefit
ratio. If NIfTI proves useful in addressing informatics issues in the
fMRI research community, it may be expanded to address similar issues
in other areas of neuroimaging.

Major objectives now envisioned for NIfTI are described below, as are
the principals that will guide this effort and the significance it is
hoped to have for neuroimaging research.


Objectives, principles and significance
=======================================

The objectives of NIfTI are to embody the following features:

* Enhancement of existing informatics tools used widely in
  neuroimaging research

* Dissemination of neuroimaging informatics tools and information
  about them

* Community-based approaches to solving common problems, such as lack
  of interoperability of tools and data

* Unique training activities and research career development
  opportunities to those in the tool-user and tool-developer
  communities

* Research and development of the next generation of neuroimaging
  informatics tools


The operating and maintainance principles of NIfTI are:

* Guidance through close and ongoing communication with the tool-user
  and tool-developer communities

* Intellectual property rights and credit for tools to remain with
  original authors

* Coordination within NIfTI and across other, related, programs and
  activities

* Optimal mechanism to be used for each activity, drawing from both
  intramural and extramural resources

* Involvement of multiple Institutes at NIH and across the wider
  neuroimaging community


Throughout its 20+ year history, NIfTI has been a highly successful
data format, such as in the following factors:

* More useful and useable neuroimaging informatics tools

* One-stop resource for neuroimaging informatics tools and information
  about them

* Environment to facilitate convergence on common solutions to
  widespread problems

* Maximize scientific opportunities from neuroimaging research


|
